---
# General Information
category: "User Interfaces"
number: 11
type: "Lecture"
title: "Intro to Flexbox"
created: "2024-02-23T12:17:29Z"
---

# Test 1

This will be a closed-book/computer test with no access to notes permitted. You will have approximately 2 hours to complete the exam. Initially, I had intended to grant access to VsCode for the test, considering this is not a memorization-oriented course. However, I realized that VsCode provides easy access to MDN Web Docs, which would compromise the integrity of the exam.

Regarding CSS properties, if any are required for the test, I will provide reminders of the property names as needed. The focus is on understanding and application rather than on memorization.

## Sample Questions to Expect

- CSS vs HTML vs JavaScript
- Understand the anatomy of a tag
- Why use DevTools? What are DevTools manipulating?
- Understand the relationship of different HTML elements with each other

## Long Answer Questions to Expect

If presented with a code snippet, you should be capable of determining the visual output generated by the code. Similarly, if given broken code, you should be able to tell me where the error is.

## Conclusion

It is not my intention to create any surprises. The course notes (Lectures 1-8) cover all the theory, while practical experience from Lab 1, Lab 2, and the Hackathon will equip you with extensive in-class exposure.

Regarding grades for labs, you can expect to receive them shortly.

# Intro

Over the years, the evolution of web design has witnessed the emergence of innovative techniques while some older approaches have faded into obscurity. Among these advancements, Flexbox stands out as a relatively recent addition to CSS, revolutionizing web applications and user interface.

Flexbox, short for "Flexible Box Layout," is a layout model in CSS designed for creating dynamic and responsive layouts. With Flexbox, the intricacies of crafting complex layouts are significantly streamlined, reducing the need for convoluted HTML structures. Moreover, flex offers better support for various screen sizes and devices, contributing to improved user experience across various platforms.

# Before starting

DevTools will be crucial for you in the following lectures. If something isn’t behaving the way you expect, inspecting it in the developer tools should be your first step every time.

# Flexbox

Flexbox is a way to arrange items into rows or columns. These items will flex (i.e. grow or shrink) based on some rules that you can define.

What do the below code snippets print?

```css
.flex-container {
  display: flex; /* add this to make a flex container */
}

.flex-item {
  background: peachpuff;
  margin: 2px;
  height: 100px;
  flex: 1; /* add this to make a flex item */
}
```

```html
<div class="flex-container">
  <div class="flex-item"></div>
  <div class="flex-item"></div>
  <div class="flex-item"></div>
</div>
```

If copy-and-pasted correctly, you should see all 3 `flex-items` arranged horizontally:

```text
 _______     _______     _______
|       |   |       |   |       |
|       |   |       |   |       |
|_______|   |_______|   |_______|

```

## What occurs when you resize the browser window?

You'll notice that the `flex-items` adapt to fill the available area while maintaining equal width. However, due to the fixed height set at `100px`, this should remain unchanged.

## What happens if i add more flex-items?

The `flex-items` will show up alongside the others, and everything will flex to fit within the available area.

```text
 ____     ____     ____     ____
|    |   |    |   |    |   |    |
|    |   |    |   |    |   |    |
|____|   |____|   |____|   |____|

```

the items will squish together on a single row ^

# Containers & Items

## What's the difference?

A flex container is any element that has `display: flex` on it. A "flex item" is any element that lives directly inside of a flex container. Going back to our original example:

```text
               container
 _____________________________________
|   _______     _______     _______   |
|  |       |   |       |   |       |  |
|  | item  |   | item  |   | item  |  |
|  |_______|   |_______|   |_______|  |
|_____________________________________|

```

## Can they be nested?

Yes !! Any element can be both a `flex-container` and a `flex-item`. In other words, for any flex-item, you can also put `display: flex` and then use flexbox to arrange that item's children:

```text
               container
 _____________________________________
|            sub-container            |
|   _______     _______     _______   |
|  |       |   |   |   |   |       |  |
|  | item  |   | i | i |   | item  |  |
|  |_______|   |___|___|   |_______|  |
|_____________________________________|

```

# Exercises

- [Inspect and Debug CSS Flexbox layouts](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/css/flexbox)
- [Flexbox Froggy](https://flexboxfroggy.com/)

```text
    /\_____/\
   /  o   o  \
  ( ==  ^  == )
```
